Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Justin Le Miller. He's
a research fellow at the Kinsey Institute and an
internationally recognized sex educator, and today we're going to
focus. Primarily on his book Tell Me What You
Want, The Science of Sexual desire and how it
can help you improve your sex life, and we're
going to talk about sexual fantasy. So, Doctor Le
Miller, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Hi, Ricardo, thanks for having me.
So tell us first, perhaps just to introduce the
topic here, what is a sexual fantasy and what
counts as such?
So a sexual fantasy is basically a mental image
or thought that turns you on. And this is
something that happens while you're awake and conscious. So
we're not talking about sexual dreams here. That's a
different feast entirely, and the content of sex dreams
can often be quite different from the content of
our sexual fantasies, but a sexual fantasy, the simplest
way to think about it is that it's a
mental picture that turns you on and that pops
into your head while you're awake.
And how has psychology traditionally dealt with sexual fantasies?
I mean, how are they approached?
So they've been viewed somewhat differently over time in
the field. So for example, if you go back
to the days of Sigmund Freud as one example,
he viewed fantasies through a pretty negative lens. So
Freud famously wrote that a happy person never fantasizes,
only a dissatisfied one. So Freud's view was really
that you wouldn't have indeed to fantasize if you
were sexually content and that you would only be
fantasizing if there was something wrong or missing in
your sexual life. Now, over time, views in the
field shifted and, you know, in the 1960s, the
psychologist Dr. Jerome Singer published a book called Daydreaming
where he really reframed the way that we think
about sexual fantasies and instead of viewing them as
a Through this sort of deficit lens, he viewed
fantasies as something that could be a positive, healthy,
normal aspect of, of our sexuality, and that really
reflects more the dominant view of the field today
is that for the most part, fantasizing is viewed
as the This healthy aspect of sexuality, you know,
we see that people who fantasize more tend to
have fewer sexual problems, tend to be more sexually
satisfied, but that's not to say that fantasies are
positive or healthy in all cases, right? There can
be a dark side to sexual fantasizing where Sometimes
people might feel a lot of distress about the
things that they fantasize about, or they might fantasize
about things that would be illegal or nonconsensual to
do, and they're afraid that they might act on
them, and, you know, that sort of becomes a
whole other issue where, you know, what is the
link between fantasy and sexual offending, and I don't
know if we'll have time to get into that,
but, you know, there's all kinds of things that
could be said here, but there's certainly been a
big shift in the way the field has viewed
fantasies over time.
Yeah, hopefully later we will have time to get
into that a little bit more, but what is
the deal with what psychologists and I guess also
psychiatrists call paraphilia? I mean, what, what is a
paraphilia exactly? Because it sounds to me that it,
that it has a sort of negative connotation attached
to it.
Yeah, so a paraphilia clinically defined refers to an
unusual or atypical or uncommon sexual interest. And You
know, the term paraphilia, if you look at the
current version of the DSM, there are about 8
specific paraphillias that are defined in there, and that
includes things like exhibitionism, which is where you're non-consensually
showing your genitals off to to someone else. It
includes voyeurism, things like where you're spying on other
people without their knowledge or consent. It also includes
sadism and masochism. Uh, AND you know, historically lots
of things have been considered paraphillias that today aren't
considered to be paraphillias, you know, for example, up
until the early 1970s, homosexuality was actually listed as
a paraphilia in the DSM. And if you look
beyond the DSM, I actually have a book on
my shelf behind me that lists 500 specific paraphillias
in it. And when you start looking at that
list, almost anything can be considered to be a
paraphilia, you know, so it really depends on who
is defining paraphilia and, and what's the reference point,
you know, what is unusual or uncommon. Common to
one person might seem pretty normative to, to someone
else. And so, I think historically we've identified a
lot of things as paraphillias that aren't actually necessarily
statistically rare and actually aren't all that uncommon when
it comes to what it is that turns people
on. And so I think the, the bigger question
when we're talking about You know, what is a
healthy versus unhealthy sexual interest has a lot more
to do with, well, is it consensual or not,
and also does it cause distress to the individual
who has that particular sexual interest.
So do you think that perhaps some of what
are what are now considered paraphillias will be not
considered such in the future?
Yeah, I mean, I think the, the concept of
paraphilia is something that is subjective and it's always
evolving and ongoing. And in the most recent version
of the DSM for the first time ever, they
made a distinction between having a paraphilia and having
a paraphillic disorder, with the paraphilia being just you
have an uncommon or unusual sexual interest and a
paraphillic disorder meaning it's uncommon or unusual. Plus it's
coupled with distress or it's leading to other problems
or it's related to criminality or something along those
lines. So, you know, in the past, in the
field, we didn't really make that distinction, and so
things like BDSM would get lumped into this paraphilia
category and then would be associated with mental illness,
when in reality, most people who are kinky and
into BDSM. ARE perfectly psychologically well adjusted, right? So
it's a subjective thing that I think is always
evolving in terms of how we think about it,
view it, treat it in the field.
So let's get into the survey you conducted a
few years ago on Americans sexual fantasies, which is
the main thing you explore in your book. So
tell us first, how did you conduct the study?
So this was a survey that I conducted for
a book that I wrote called Tell Me What
You Want, and the survey took me a couple
of years to do because I recruited data, or
I recruited participants from all over the US, from
all 50 states, and it was a large sample
of Almost 4200 American adults ranging in age from
18 all the way up through their eighties, and
I asked them to complete this very extensive online
survey. It consisted of, I think, 369 questions that
asked about their favorite fantasy of all time. Hundreds
of different people, places and things they might have
ever fantasized about, as well as extensive questions about
their personalities, their attachment styles, their demographic backgrounds, and,
and lots of other aspects of the self because
I wanted to look at not just what do
people fantasize about, but is there any connection between
our fantasies and different aspects of the self. So
are our fantasies related to our personalities or demographic
backgrounds or age and things like that.
And so what are the most common or what
were the most common sexual fantasies?
So I analyzed people's favorite fantasy of all time
and found that there were really 7 main themes
that seemed to categorize them. So, the first of
these was multi-partner sex, which was basically sex involving
more than 2 people, could be a threesome orgy,
anything involving some type of group. Then there were
the power, control, and rough sex fantasies, which was
anything that falls under the kink or BDSM umbrella.
Then we have the novelty and adventure fantasies, which
are about kind of just adding a new twist
or new element to to sex, such as having
sex in a new position or location or or
just otherwise adding some element of novelty or adventure.
Then we have the passion and romance fantasies, which
are fantasies about emotional fulfillment in some way, tapping
into some deeper psychological need, such as the desire
to be desired, you know, wanting to feel wanted
by a partner. Then we have the non-monogamy fantasies,
which are different from the group sex fantasies because
these are fantasies about being able to pursue multiple
sexual or romantic relationships at the same time. So
for instance, that might involve a fantasy about cheating
on your romantic partner, or it might involve a
fantasy about you and your partner swinging with another
couple or something along those lines. Then we have
the gender bending and homoeroticism fantasies, which are about
sort of playing with the boundaries or limits of
your gender identity or sexual identity in some way,
such as a cisgender person who fantasizes about cross-dressing
or a heterosexual person who has a same sex
fantasy. And then finally, there are the taboo fantasies,
which are basically the fantasies that involve doing anything
that is socially or culturally forbidden for you.
Do you think, or did you find that there's
perhaps any common thread that runs along all of
these fantasies, or are they completely distinct from one
another?
Well, so in terms of these seven themes, they're
not mutually exclusive. Like these are different themes that
can be combined in any number of ways. And
in some of the follow-up research that I've done,
I've asked people to describe their favorite fantasy and
then to select which of these. Themes apply to
that particular fantasy that they have, and I find
that more often than not, people are selecting multiple
elements, and there's only about 2 to 3% of
people who say that none of those seven themes
apply to their favorite fantasy. So I consider these
to be kind of the seven. Building blocks, if
you will, of our erotic fantasies that can be
combined in in any number of ways, and that
I think are tapping into, you know, sort of
different core erotic needs that people have, like the
need for novelty or the, you know, sort of
need to connect with someone else, right? And for
some people one particular need is more important than
another, and that goes into You know, how I
found that our fantasies are related to a lot
of different aspects of the self, they're related to
where we are in our lives at a given
point, and so some of those themes might be
more important at different stages of development or different
stages of life.
Um, SO this study or this survey was conducted
among a sample of American individuals. Do you have
any idea if, uh, other people have conducted similar
surveys in other countries or if, uh, your findings
could extrapolate to other countries?
Yeah, so since I conducted the original survey for
the book, I've studied the sexual fantasies of more
than 10,000 people from all around the world, and
I've actually partnered with and collaborated with some researchers
in other countries to try and replicate the results.
And what we see is that for the most
part, the things in the US that are the
most common sexual fantasies tend to be the most
common sexual fantasies in other parts of the world,
and the least common fantasies here in the states
also tend to be the least common fantasies elsewhere.
Now, now certainly there are some Some differences and
variations, you know, for example, one that pops out
to me off the top of my head is
that I find that on average, people who live
in European countries, especially Western Europe, tend to have
more of the kinky sexual fantasies compared to people.
In other parts of the world. So there are
some regional variations in terms of the, the prevalence
of given fantasies, but for the most part, there
seems to be more commonality than differences in terms
of what it is that people around the world
are fantasizing about.
And uh what do we know about where our
sexual fantasies stem from? I mean, what influences them?
So I like to think of our fantasies as
being biopsychosocial, meaning there can be biological, psychological, and
also sociocultural factors that contribute to The extent to
which we have fantasies and then also specifically what
it is that we fantasize about. So for example,
if we think about biological factors in relation to
sexual fantasies, well, something like our hormone levels is
actually really important when it comes to whether or
not we even have fantasies. So what we see
is that for instance, when People have lower levels
of sex hormones in their bodies, they tend to
have fewer fantasies, and this is part of the
reason why as people age, fantasies tend to decrease
in frequency. Uh, YOU know, I've done some research,
for example, recently on menopausal women and their sexuality,
and I find that There tends to be a
decline in sexual fantasies for women as they undergo
the menopause transition. However, for menopausal women who are
given hormone therapy or hormone replacement, they don't experience
as big of a drop in their sexual fantasies,
right? So, you know, that's, that's one example of
a biological. Logical factor related to fantasizing and you
know, there's also some work on the menstrual cycle
and sexual fantasies and what we see is that
women actually fantasize more about sex when they're near
the point of ovulation. So when women are most
fertile, they tend to have more of those erotic
thoughts, right? So, Biology certainly plays a role in
terms of psychology, our personality plays a big role
in in terms of what we fantasize about. So
I find that all of the big five personality
traits are related to different types of fantasies that
people have. So as a Couple of examples, if
you're a more extroverted person, meaning you're more sociable
and outgoing in real life, you tend to have
more sociable and extroverted sexual fantasies. So you're more
likely to fantasize about group sex and non-monogamy and
other things like that. It's not to say that
it's a foregone conclusion that if you're an extrovert,
that you are into orgies, but there is a
correlation there. Also for people who are high in
say a trait like neuroticism, where they have a
lot of swings between positive and negative mood states
and where they have more difficulty dealing with and
navigating stress, they tend to play it safer in
their fantasies where they don't fantasize as much about
kind of like going outside of their comfort zone
because they want to do things that are more
comfortable for them that aren't going to stress them
out, you know, as they're thinking about sex, um.
You know, and then in terms of like the
socio-cultural factors, I do find that there are some
cross cultural differences in fantasies too. Uh, ONE of
them being in terms of who we fantasize about.
So for example, when I look at the characteristics
of the people we fantasize about, I, I ask
people about, you know, height, race, age, weight, you
know, all these other sorts of things. And one
interesting thing that I find is that if you
look at Asian Americans, so people of Asian descent
who are living in the United States, predominantly they're
fantasizing about white people. By contrast, if you look
at Asian people living in Asian cultures, they're primarily
fantasizing about other Asian people, and I think that's
one like telling example of how culture can influence
fantasies, and there are stereotypes in American culture. Culture
about Asian individuals in terms of their sexuality, for
example, the negative stereotypes about Asian men in particular,
and those kinds of stereotypes can be internalized, and
then they can transfer over into our fantasy content
in terms of how we think about or see
ourselves or in terms of who it is that
we see as desirable. And so, yeah, our fantasies
are this complex product of biology, psychology, and society
and culture.
That's really fascinating. How about porn? I mean, do
we have any idea as to whether porn influences
our sexual fantasies in terms of their content?
Yeah, so I find that pornography has a bidirectional
association with fantasizing, meaning that porn both shapes the
content of our fantasies, but people are also going
to pornography to vicariously live out their fantasies, right?
So it's not just one or the other. More
often than not, however, people are going to porn
as a way to, to kind of live out
or explore their fantasies. But I find that somewhere
around 1 in 10 people can directly connect their
favorite fantasy of all time with something that they
saw in the world of porn, right? They can
say, There was this video I saw or this
erotic novel I read, and it just sort of
awakened something in me and I fantasized about this
thing ever since. But it's not just pornography that
has this influence, right? We, we tend to like
think of porn as like this special thing that
influences our fantasies, but it's not, you know, I
also see even more people who report that their
fantasies were influenced by something they saw in popular.
Media, you know, in television or film, or something
that they, they read about in a novel that
wasn't 50 Shades of Grey or that wasn't an
erotic novel in the first place. You know, our
fantasies have these very complex and diverse roots, and
I think we'd like to oversimplify it and say
it's all about porn, especially in this era where
everybody has all this access to the world's largest
collection of porn ever known to humankind, but Fantasy
content is influenced by a lot more than just
porn. Porn is one contributing factor, but there's more
to it than that.
How about sex differences? Are there differences between men
and women when it comes to their sexual fantasies?
Sure, and if you look at the broader literature
on sexual fantasies, there have long been differences between
men and women that have been noted. And I,
you know, my research is no exception to that.
I, I will say that overall, I think there
are more similarities than differences, you know, most of
the things that men fantasize about, women also fantasize
about, and vice versa. But if you look at
some of the key differences where you see the
biggest Divergence. One is that men on average tend
to fantasize more about multi-partner sex and non-monogamy and
taboo activities compared to women, and by contrast, women
fantasize more about passion and romance and also kink
in BDSM compared to men, right? Now, another interesting
thing is that when I break my data down
and look at it by age, so if we
look at men and women, you know, by different
decades of life, the size of some of these
gender differences actually changes a little bit, and it
shrinks in some cases. So for example, the difference
between men and women in terms of the degree
to which they fantasize about sex with multiple partners
or non-monogamy actually shrinks at midlife compared to Other
stages of life, and you know, there's something that's
interesting just more generally going on in midlife where
people's fantasies across the board, across gender and sex,
just become more adventuresome in a lot of ways.
Uh, THERE could be a lot of reasons for
this, you know, one is that some people are
kind of having their midlife crisis, another is that,
uh, you know, people at that stage of life
sometimes start to care a little bit less about
what other people think and feel more freedom to
kind of explore their sexuality. But also, you have
a lot of people who have been in long-term
monogamous marriages, and you know, at that point, they're
kind of looking for this newness and novelty and
excitement because the sex has grown pretty boring or
routine or predictable in their relationship. So, uh, yes,
there are lots of sex differences, but it's interesting
that the size of those sex differences seems to
uh change at different stages of life.
And do you have any explanation for those differences?
I mean, why is it that men tend to
have a little bit more sexual fantasies related to
group sex and non-monogamy and taboo fantasies and women
more BDSM fantasies, king king fantasies and things like
that.
Sure, and there are different theories on why some
of these differences exist. And if you think about,
for example, why men have more fantasies about group
sex or non-monogamy, that's often discussed through an evolutionary
lens, right, because Evolutionarily, it's seen as more adaptive
for men to want to have sex with multiple
partners to quote unquote spread their seed, uh, because
it's more reproductively advantageous for them, and there is
some limited research where, for example, they've shown men
different types of pornography and, uh, and then collected
semen samples from them, and in one condition. They
were shown a video of, you know, kind of
an all-female threesome, and in another video, they were
shown multiple men having sex with one woman. And
what they find is that when you have multiple
men who are kind of competing, if you will,
for the same partner, that men release more motile
or active sperm in their ejaculate compared to when
they're watching an all-female. SCENARIO. And, and the thought
there is that, you know, this is some evidence
of what's called sperm competition, which is this idea
that men's brains and bodies evolved to, to kind
of be aroused by situations where you have multiple
men competing for the same female and so their,
their brains and bodies are doing things that are
going to try and help them outcompete those of
other men who are around, right? So you can
think about some of this stuff through an evolutionary
lens. I don't think we can say for sure
that, you know, that's what the explanation is, but
there is some evidence that's at least consistent with
that idea. Um, BUT yeah, it's, I, I don't
think it's fully settled in terms of why there
are these sex differences in, in sexual fantasy content,
but there are lots of different theories and ideas
out there for it.
So I asked you earlier about porn. I mean,
is there also a political element to sexual fantasies,
or do our political preferences also influence in any
way our sexual fantasies? Like, for example, in the
particular case of the US, are there differences between
Democrats and Republicans?
So I do find that there are associations between
people's political beliefs and the things that they fantasize
about, at least in the US context, because that's
primarily where I've looked at this. And what I
see is that Republicans on average fantasize more about
non-monogamy and multi-partner sex and taboo activities, um. Or
things that are taboo for them, uh, compared to,
to Democrats, right, and Republicans historically have kind of
been the party of quote unquote family values, if
you will, where they promote this ideal of monogamous
lifelong marriage and sex for purposes of procreation. So
you see a lot of these fantasies about things
that are kind of violating that norm of monogamy
among people who identify as Republicans. By contrast, in
terms of Democrats and their fantasies, I see that
they fantasize more on average about Kink and BDSM
compared to Republicans, so they have more fantasies about
power play. And I think what's going on here
is that essentially Politically, what people are fantasizing about
to some extent is that they're fantasizing about what
is taboo for them in terms of their political
context. And so for Republicans, you've got that, you
know, norm of monogamy and, you know, sex for
purposes of procreation, and so, you know, doing anything
that sort of violates or subverts that norm is,
is taboo and that becomes more exciting, you know,
whenever we're told that we're not allowed to do
something, it tends to become more. Tantalizing, right? This
goes back to something that the psychologist Jack Moran
wrote about in his book, The Erotic Mind, which
he refers to as the erotic equation, which means
attraction plus obstacles equals excitement. And so if you
have even the slightest inkling to want to do
something, and then there's this obstacle thrown up in
your path that says, no, you can't do that,
that makes us want to do it even more.
It sort of fuels the, the desire, the excitement
for it. So, and then on the, you know,
sort of democratic side. Political liberals tend to espouse
the idea of this, you know, very level playing
field, and there shouldn't be any power differentials or
imbalances, and, you know, power differentials are inherently exploitative
and so forth. And so this idea of thereby
playing with power, I think becomes more tantalizing to
people who are politically aligned with this belief that
everybody's on like a level and equal playing field.
So I think to some extent that might explain
why we see these political differences is that. It's
the cultural environment or context in which you're embedded,
where the things that you're told you're not supposed
to do just become more tantalizing.
That's really interesting. I mean, I don't know if
you know anything specifically about this, but do you
think that that same kind of interpretation of the,
the differences in terms of sexual fantasies between Democrats
and Republicans could explain. Data coming from Pornhub that
points to uh red states consuming more, uh, trans
porn, for example. I mean, because people who identify
as Republican or are more conservative tend to not
like trans people as much or consider the topic
of trans people as taboo in a way. Do
you think that that could explain it as well,
or?
Yeah, I mean there could certainly be something to
that and, and you know, related to that, something
that I've seen in some of my own data
is that there's this link between having a toward
religion, there's this link between religiosity and same-sex attraction
that also emerges and you know that's another one
of those taboo things for um people who are
more politically conservative and so. And, and I, I
think it's important to mention that our fantasies themselves
are not politically correct, and they often do not
align with our political values in the way that
you might think that they do, and, and I
think that there is some of that, you know,
just sort of taboo element that's going on there,
but I think there's also this element of internalized
shame where if you were brought up in an
Environment where you're told that certain things are wrong,
but that is like a core aspect of who
you are and how you experience your sexuality, that
can lead to a certain level of shame that
leads you to present a different version of yourself
to the outside world than who you are in
private. And that's, so that's why you often see
people who get embroiled in these sexual scandals where
they've been espousing certain political ideas, but in private,
they've been Doing something, let's just say quite different.
Yeah, uh, what does, what do one's sexual fantasies
say about oneself? I mean, if we know about
the sexual fantasies of someone, can we tell anything
about them just from their fantasies?
So, I wouldn't say that if you told me
what your biggest fantasy of all time was that
I could 100% give you an accurate reading of
your personality. I, I, I don't think it's that
simple. What I can tell you is that I
do see a predictable pattern of associations across multiple
studies between the things people fantasize about and their
personality traits, their attachment styles. Their sociosexuality, their political
and religious background, their age, right? So, fantasies are
associated with a whole bunch of different factors, and
so I could make an educated guess based on
something that somebody fantasizes about what their personality or
demographic traits are likely to be, but I wouldn't
say that it could be 100% accurate because These
are just correlations, they're associations. But the fact that
they exist and they exist consistently tells us that
there is something there, like that, if our fantasies
had no meaning, this would just all be random
noise, you know, we wouldn't see anything, we wouldn't
see these predictable patterns in the data. But the
fact that we do says, yeah, our fantasies do
seem to tell us something about who we are
and where we are in our life right now.
And I think it's also important to emphasize that
two people can have the same fantasy, but for
very different reasons. So, let's take for example, the
fantasy of a threesome. Not everybody who fantasizes about
a threesome. Fantasize about it, fantasizes about it for
the same reason. So for example, for some people,
a threesome fantasy might actually be a way for
them to explore some same sex or same gender
attraction that they have, right? Because maybe they are
a man partnered with a woman, but they have
a threesome in which another man comes in and
so it's a Way of, of kind of exploring
that homoeroticism element. For other people, however, a threesome
might be more about, it might be less about
the gender or sex of their partners and more
about wanting to be the center of attention, and
wanting to be overwhelmingly desired by multiple people at
once, right? And so, This is where it gets
a little bit tricky with our fantasies, and it's
why we don't have necessarily huge associations between fantasies
and some of these other traits and characteristics is
because different people can have that fantasy for different
reasons. Yeah.
And we've talked here mainly about the themes, or
the seven main themes you uncovered through your, uh,
survey, your research when it comes to people's sexual
fantasies, but who do people fantasize about? I mean,
uh, what, what are the people that tend to
be part of their fantasies? Mhm.
So, this is a good question, and the single
most person who's likely to appear in your fantasies
is your current romantic partner, if you're somebody who
is in a current romantic relationship. Now, if you're
not currently in a relationship, the most likely person
to appear in your fantasies is an ex-partner, right?
So, more often than not in our fantasies. We
are picturing people that we know well and who
we are currently or have previously been intimately involved
with, and I think that speaks to the fact
that our fantasies are often about meeting some deeper
emotional need or wanting to connect with someone else,
and it's easier to Feel emotionally validated in that
way when you're picturing somebody with whom you already
have or at least have had that connection with
before. By contrast, if you look at fantasies about,
you know, celebrities and the rich and famous, you
know, certainly most people have had one of those
fantasies before at one time or another, but more
often than not, that's not who we're picturing when
we close our eyes and, and, and fantasize and
fantasize. There, there can be a whole host of
other people who appear in our fantasies though. I,
it can also include friends and and acquaintances. It
could include co-workers or bosses, uh, it could include
superheroes or comic book characters, right? There's a whole
host of different people who might appear in our
sexual fantasies, but most of the time it's somebody
that we actually know fairly well.
Yeah, that's really interesting. So should we say, or
can we say that all sexual fantasies are normal?
I mean, and perhaps this ties back to my
earlier question about paraphillias, but are all of them
normal or not?
Well, it depends what you mean by the term
normal, right? So, you know, when I use the
term normal in this context of talking about fantasies,
I'm using it to refer to things that are
statistically common, right? And And that's not how everybody
else uses the term normal, right? For some people,
normal implies more of a value judgment, like that
this is a healthy or unhealthy thing to, to
fantasize about. So I'm, I'm staying out of the
realm of, of judgment and using it more in
the, the sense of, is this statistically common or
not. And, you know, using that as, as, as
sort of the framework here, no, not every fantasy
is normal in the sense of being statistically common,
but a lot of the things that we've historically
thought of as being abnormal are actually pretty normal
in terms of being more common than we thought.
So for instance, things like kink and BDSM fantasies,
they're so common in the population as to be
considered normative. Also, if you look at fantasies about
something like voyeurism, you know, spying on other people
who are undressing or having sex, also incredibly common.
But, you know, this question of, well, is it
normal in the sense of being common? Does that
mean it's OK to have the fantasy? Well, that's
a different question, right? You know, this, this healthy
or unhealthy thing is, is a totally separate element.
So in the case of consensual kink and BDSM.
Yeah, it's common, and as long as it's consensual
and risk away or risk informed for the people
who are participating in it, there's nothing inherently wrong
with with taking part in it. But for something
like voyeurism, which is by definition inherently nonconsensual, even
though it is common and and normative in the
population, that doesn't mean that it would be OK
to act on, because by definition, it is inherently
nonconsensual. So again, I think we often have this
tendency of getting too wrapped up and looking at
the prevalence of a given fantasy and using that
as our metric for saying whether a given fantasy
is good or bad. I think instead we need
to look at, well, is this consensual or nonconsensual?
And is, is somebody being harmed by, you know,
if they were to act on that particular fantasy,
or is it causing distress to the individual who,
who has the fantasy?
So people have their sexual fantasies. What happens when
they share them with others, and I mean, how
should people go about sharing their fantasies?
So I find that across the surveys that I've
done, about half of adults say that they've ever
shared a sexual fantasy with a partner before. And
for the most part, people are reporting positive outcomes,
like somewhere between 2/3, 3/4 are saying their partner
responded favorably or positively, and then there's some portion
who say that. You know, there, there wasn't really
a strong response one way or the other, and
then a small number who are saying their partner
responded pretty negatively. So for the most part, people
are reporting positive outcomes when they share fantasies. Now,
one caveat to that is that people are a
little bit selective in terms of the fantasies that
they share with their partner, and they're more likely
to share fantasies that they think are going to
get a positive response. So this isn't to say
that If you shared every single fantasy you've ever
had that your partner's likely to have a positive
response to every single one of those. No, uh,
the way the data should be interpreted is that,
you know, for fantasies that people intentionally choose to
share with a partner. Based on what they think
their partner is likely to be into, their partners
usually respond favorably. Now, in terms of how to
share a fantasy with a partner, I don't think
there's just one right or correct way to do
this because different people have different comfort levels, different
types and forms of preferred sexual communication, but here
are a few things that you can consider. So
one is that, you know, if you have a
hard time verbalizing your sexual wants and needs and
desires. You can actually leverage technology to help you
with this. So, for example, there are a couple
of apps that I often recommend. I don't have
a financial stake in them. I wish that I
did because I recommend them all the time, uh,
but one of them is called X Confessions, the
other one is called Own Your Sex, and basically
they're both sort of like Tinder for sexual fantasies.
And so you and your partner each download the
app, you sync your accounts, and then separately you
take a survey that's Prompts you with different sexual
acts or ideas that you might try, and then
you basically swipe right if you're into it and
swipe left if you aren't. And then what the
apps will do is they will compile your shared
sexual interests, and they will only reveal to each
of you the things that you're both into. So
in that way, you don't have to risk Sharing
something with your partner that they might not be
into. So I think that technology can be a
very useful way of kind of getting that conversation
started and quickly honing in on your shared sexual
interests. Another way to have this conversation, if it
feels hard to just sort of put your specific
fantasy out there, is to, to reframe the conversation
from being, what's your fantasy to how do you
want to feel during sex? You know, what are
the physical sensations that you want to experience, what
are the emotions that you want to feel? Essentially,
what are your core erotic themes or needs during
sex? And that's a totally different conversation and sometimes
one that's easier for people to have, because it
gets away from the particulars of a given fantasy
because often Those particulars aren't really what it is
that kind of turns us on and drives us
wild. It's more about the deeper Intimate needs that
we might have. And so the nice thing about
that question of how do you want to feel
during sex is that if you can identify each
partner's core erotic themes, you can then play with
that, and you can kind of build a custom
fantasy together that's going to meet everybody's needs in
that moment. And then, you know, other ways you
can do this, I often recommend, you know, using
popular media as as sort of an icebreaker or
jumping off point. So, if you watch a movie
or TV show that has a steamy scene in
it that depicts a turn on that you have,
afterwards, you can just have a conversation with your
partner about, oh, what did you think about when
this happened, or wasn't it hot when they did
this, or You know, there's all kinds of ways
that you can just sort of broach the conversation
to kind of get it started. And then one
other thing I'll say is that you can also
kind of turn it into a game. Like I
love suggesting playing that game of would you rather,
where you can just kind of go back and
forth saying things like, would you rather be tied
up in bed or would you rather tie me
up? And that's just a super easy way of
Feeling your partner out for what they might be
more or less into without you having to put
your specific fantasies out there and, and kind of
owning them, right? So it can be a kind
of a fun and, and low stress way of
getting that conversation going.
OK, so we've covered the most common sexual fantasies,
how people go about sharing their fantasies with their
partners or other people. Uh, DO people actually tend
to act on their sexual fantasies?
For the most part, no. And again, this is
a pretty consistent finding across all the surveys I've
done is that when I ask people. If their
favorite fantasy of all time is something that they
would like to try in the future, I find
that about 80% of people say that, yeah, it's,
it's a desire, meaning it's something that I want
to do, but only about 1 in 5 people
say that they've ever actually tried it before, right?
So 80% say they want to do it, only
20% say that they've ever done it. So there's
a very big gap between fantasy and reality, and
You know, I've asked people, well, you know, if
this is something that you want to do, why
haven't you acted on it before? And I find
that there are lots of things that are holding
people back, and they shouldn't be that surprising, but
one of the biggest is that they say they
don't have a willing partner, so their partner's just
not into it, and Therefore, it's something that they
can't act out. But also there's a lot of
fear and uncertainty that hold people back too, where
a lot of people say, well, I don't know
what would happen if I were to act this
out, like, Could I get hurt? Could somebody else
get hurt? How would this affect my relationship? Like,
I'm just afraid of what's gonna happen. And then
there's also the, I just don't even know how
to do this. Like, for example, a lot of
people think it's challenging enough to find just one
other sexual partner, let alone many at the same
time to have a threesome or orgy or something
like that. And so, you know, that uncertainty of
just like, I don't even know how to do
this is a big thing too. And then of
course there are multiple other reasons, you know, for
some people their fantasy is just totally impossible to
do. You know, I have a lot of fantasies
that take place in outer space or in sci-fi
worlds, and yeah, it turns people on in their
minds, but the only way they can ever bring
that fantasy to life would be to roleplay it
because they can't actually do it because the things
that they're turned on by don't exist in, in
real life. So there are lots of things that
might prevent us from acting on our fantasies.
And would you say that there are risks and
benefits of acting on one's fantasies, and if so,
what would they be?
So I think there are both risks and benefits
to sharing fantasies and also acting on them. And
what I see is that I think it's a
little bit riskier to act on a fantasy than
it is to share a fantasy. You know, talking
about what you're turned on by is one thing,
but actually trying it in real life is a
whole other beast, and there's more things that can
go wrong there. So, if we talk about sharing
a fantasy, the, the risk reward analysis to do
there, uh, is, you know, if you share this
fantasy, it could bring you and your partner closer.
It could help you to better understand each other
as sexual beings. It could Deepen your intimacy and
trust in your partner, it could improve your sexual
communication. It might also be a form of dirty
talk that turns both you and your partner on.
So those are some of the benefits, but some
of the risks of sharing a fantasy would be,
well, maybe they're not into what you're into, and
this is going to reveal a deeper incompatibility in
your relationship, or maybe you're Partner will judge you
or shame you, and then you're gonna feel embarrassed
by having shared that fantasy, right? So there are
things that can go wrong when it comes to
sharing fantasies. Now, when it comes to acting on
them, you know, of course, some of the benefits
would be maybe you'll have a really great time
and you'll check something off of your sexual bucket
list, and it will Add some spark or intensity
or passion back into your relationship, and it'll lead
you to, to try and explore new and other
things with your partner down the road in the
future, you know, so it could kind of be
the, the kicking off point for a new chapter
in your sexual relationship. You know, there's all kinds
of benefits. That could happen from acting on a
fantasy. Um, WE also see in the research that
women in particular who share and act on their
fantasies also have much more consistent orgasms than women
who don't share and act on their fantasies. So
when we talk about something like closing the orgasm
gap, I think for women in particular, getting in
touch with what it is that they really want
and what turns them on when it comes to
sex could actually really be key in terms of
closing the orgasm gap. But when we talk about
the risks of acting on fantasies, well, you know,
I'm a social psychologist by training, and I, we
talk a lot about affective forecasting, which is where
we predict what our future emotional state is going
to be, and we tend to be pretty poor
predictors of how we're going to feel in future
situations. And so when we picture a future situation
where we think we're going to feel good, we
tend to overestimate how good we're going to feel.
And the same thing is true when it comes
to our fantasies is that we often go in
with these sky-high expectations, and then The fantasy doesn't
live up to it. And so I think we
need to have a reality check before we go
in and act on a fantasy and recognize that,
you know, practice actually kind of makes perfect when
it comes to fantasies, because there's going to be
a learning curve, and there's going to be some
uncertainty, and there are going to be things that
you didn't think about before you got into. THAT
situation, where maybe you'll have unexpected emotions that pop
up, or things just won't go according to plan.
And, and so, you know, acting on a fantasy
just brings some new risks that are different, because
it's hard to anticipate what all the eventualities will
be. And so, You know, I often like to
say, you know, if you're going to act out
a fantasy, you probably need to try it at
least 2 or 3 times to know for sure
that it's not for you, because the first time
is just, there's a big learning curve associated with
it.
Right. Are there circumstances where people should seek professional
help from a clinical psychologist or a psychiatrist to
manage their sexual desires?
So the, the two big things that would come
up here would be if you have fantasies about
something that are inherently nonconsensual or illegal, and it's
coupled with the desire where it's something that you
want to do and you're afraid that you might
actually act on it, that's the case where it's
important to seek help in terms of managing those
desires so that you don't actually do that thing
that would hurt someone else. The other big category
in terms of help seeking would be if you
have a fantasy that feels like it's out of
control or it is very distressing to you, and
this fantasy is interfering with your ability to, to,
to have a normal life in some way. For
example, if it's interfering with your relationship or your
job performance or, or something else like that, that's
another case where it would be important uh to
seek help. Now, I will say that, you know,
a lot of people go and and seek help
from therapists because they just think their fantasies aren't
normal and they think there's something wrong with them.
And in a lot of cases, the therapists are
able to solve this problem just with a little
bit of sex education. You know, it's often just
helping people to learn and understand that. Hey, you're
not alone in having this fantasy, and there's nothing
inherently wrong with this, and, and here's kind of
what you need to know about it. More often
than not, that solves the problem. But when you've
got those issues of distress, or when you've got,
you know, that non-consensual or illegal element that's coupled
with an intent or desire to act it out,
that's when it's really, really important to, to seek
professional help from a certified sex therapist.
OK, so finally, I would like to ask you
perhaps one or two questions about a post from
your website. Uh, WHERE you talk about, I think
it's from last December, December, December last year, uh,
where you talk about how many sexual partners most
people have had because there are many misconceptions, I
think that people have about these topics. So, uh,
what, what kinds of data can we look into
to learn more about that and what do we
actually know about. But the most common number of
lifetime partners that people have sexual partners in this
case.
Mhm. Yeah, so this is one of the most
common questions that readers of my website will send
in is, you know, what's, what's a normal or
typical, quote unquote body count is the term that
a lot of people use. I don't personally like
that term, but it's the term that a lot
of people tend to throw around and it's kind
of what the, the popular slang is on, uh,
social media. Now, there are lots of different data
sources on this, and a lot of them actually
come from nationally representative surveys. Now, uh, I should
mention that there are some caveats to the data
on nationally representative surveys, which is that oftentimes they're
not necessarily using the broadest definition of sex. So,
historically, sex on national survey. WAS defined as penis
and vagina intercourse. And if you're asking people, well,
how many partners have you had where you've had,
you know, this specific type of intercourse with, that's
a different question from how many partners have you
had where you've engaged in oral sex or mutual
masturbation or, you know, other sexual activities because sex
doesn't mean just one thing. So, you know, that
is a limitation of a lot of the data
that's out there is that It defines sex in
different ways, and that's part of the reason why
the numbers are kind of all over the map
in terms of what different studies are finding. But,
you know, a lot of the recent studies are
suggesting that average number of partners is usually somewhere
between 4 and 6. And for some people, that's
really surprising cause they're like, that seems shocking, shockingly
low. And for other people, they're like, well, that's
Seems really high, and then for others, they're like,
yeah, that sounds about right, you know, and, and
it's because everybody's coming from a different reference point
with all of this. On average, there is a
sex difference here, such that men typically report more
sexual partners than women. And historically, if you look
at surveys, men report having about twice as many
sexual partners as women do. And even when you
just look at heterosexual folks, you're seeing that difference
there. And that's one of those cases where like
the math isn't really mapping, right? Because, well, who
are the men having all of this sex with,
you know, they're reporting having all of these excess
sexual partners. And what we see in other research
is that, you know, there is There is a
little bit of exaggeration that sometimes goes on there,
on the part of men. So, for example, uh,
Doctor Terry Fisher conducted the study that I love,
uh, some time ago, where she had male and
female college students come into a lab and hook
them up to a device that she convinced them
was a lie detector and could tell, you know,
when they were lying versus telling the truth and
You know, ask them about the number of sexual
partners they had, and then there was another condition
in that study where participants were just reporting on
a, you know, sort of anonymous survey like the
number of sexual partners they've had, and what they
found was that When people were hooked up to
the lie detector, the gender difference between men and
women kind of disappeared compared to, to other conditions,
right, which says like, hey, there, there's a little
bit of exaggeration going on here. But also men
are more likely to ballpark their number, whereas women
are more likely to, to count. So there's also
a difference in counting strategy that plays a role
there. And then also one other factor. Uh, IS
that you have a small number of men who
do report this very large number of partners, and,
and we don't know to what extent that might
be exaggeration versus there might be a small number
of men who do have a very, very large
number of partners, which kind of skews the average
for all men. So, yeah, 4 to 6 is
kind of what we're seeing is average number, but
there is that gender difference, but lots of factors
contributing to why that gender difference might exist.
I mean, one idea that came to mind when
I was reading your post was that there's this
very common idea that nowadays, particularly in the West,
we live in a, in a hook hookup culture,
but I mean, looking at the numbers and the
percent of people that have 15+ partners, which tend,
which seems to be low, and most people. Having
456 partners, I mean, don't you think that, that
perhaps contradicts that idea?
Mhm. Yeah, so there has been a lot that's
been said and written about hookup culture, and it's
interesting because as we've heard more and more about
hookup culture, at the same time, when you're looking
at the data and research, What we're seeing is
that people today across the board are having less
sex with fewer partners than ever before. Like some
people have termed this the sex recession. And so
on the one hand, we're hearing about hookup culture,
which makes it seem like everybody's hooking up and
having casual sex all the time, but by the
same token, it's like, no, actually we're less sexually
active than, you know, any generation before in terms
of our kind of like recent recorded history. And,
and so there is a bit of a, a
discrepancy and a divide there. I, I think one
thing that is important to note though is that
although people today do have fewer sexual partners on
average than they did in the past, a greater
proportion of their partners today are casual partners instead
of long-term committed partners. So, you know, that's where
there is some truth, some elements to, to this
hookup culture, which, which is that, yes, we do
have more casual partners than we did in the
past, but overall, we actually have fewer partners and
we're having less sex.
Yeah, that's really interesting. OK, so we're already reaching
our time limit, so I'm just going to tell
people that I'm going to leave a link to
your book in the description of the interview, which
is again, tell me what you want. And uh
Doctor Le Miller, would you like also to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Yeah, so I run the Sex and Psychology blog
and podcast, which you can find at sexanpsychology.com. I'm
also on all of the socials. I think I'm
most active on Instagram at Justin J Ley Miller,
but you can also find me on X and
Blue Sky at Justin Ley Miller. And I'm also,
you know, basically anywhere else you can find on
social media, just go to sexanpsychology.com and you'll find
my social links there.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
really fun and fascinating conversation about sexual fantasies.
It was my pleasure. Thanks for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman,
Semov, Zal Adrian Yei, Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall, Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel
Pan Scortezus Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank,
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.